README.md, before:

# dem-handler
Utilility package for handling various Digital Elevation Models (DEMs). The package enables access to data stored in cloud as well as local copies of dem datasets. 

## Supported DEMS
- Copernicus Global 30m (cop_glo30)
- REMA (2m,10m, ...)

## Usage
### Download tiles

```python
import os
from dem_handler.dem.cop_glo30 import get_cop30_dem_for_bounds
from dem_handler.dem.rema import get_rema_dem_for_bounds

import logging
logging.basicConfig(level=logging.INFO)

#Set the bounds and make a directory for the files to download

bounds = (72,-70, 73, -69)
save_dir = 'TMP'
os.makedirs(save_dir, exist_ok=True)

#The copernicus Global 30m DEM 

get_cop30_dem_for_bounds(
    bounds = bounds,
    save_path = f'{save_dir}/cop_glo30.tif',
    adjust_at_high_lat=False,
    cop30_folder_path = save_dir,
    ellipsoid_heights = False,
    download_dem_tiles = True
)

# The REMA DEM (32m)

get_rema_dem_for_bounds(
    bounds=bounds,
    save_path=f'{save_dir}/rema.tif',
    resolution=32,
    bounds_crs=4326,
    rema_folder_path='TMP'
)
```

## Developer Setup

```bash
git clone ...
conda create --file environment.yaml
pip install -e .
```

Test install

```bash
pytest
```

## Contact
...

Commit message:

Add functionality description and design doc

README.md, after:

# dem-handler
Utility package for handling various Digital Elevation Models (DEMs). 
The package enables access to data stored in cloud as well as local copies of dem datasets. 

## Functionality

The core functionality of this package is to provide mosaicked DEMs for arbitrary bounds.
This is valuable for creating a mosaicked DEM that covers a scene. 
The package provides high level functions for [supported DEMs](#supported-dems), and 
low level functions that can be used to handle custom DEMs. 

The DEM mosaicking functions have the following features:
* When requesting a DEM for bounds that include the ocean, the mosaicked DEM will 
include the ocean, setting the value of non-land pixels to 0 (height above the geoid).
* If a geoid height model is provided, the height above the ellipsoid can be returned.
* The functions work for DEM tiles stored in the cloud or locally.
* The mosaicked DEM can be returned in memory, as well as saved to a file for reuse. 

For more information on how the above functionality was implemented, 
see the [design documentation](docs/design.md).

## Supported DEMS
- Copernicus Global 30m (cop_glo30)
- REMA (2m,10m, ...)

## Usage
### Create mosaicked DEM for bounds from cloud files

```python
import os
from dem_handler.dem.cop_glo30 import get_cop30_dem_for_bounds
from dem_handler.dem.rema import get_rema_dem_for_bounds

import logging
logging.basicConfig(level=logging.INFO)

#Set the bounds and make a directory for the files to download

bounds = (72,-70, 73, -69)
save_dir = 'TMP'
os.makedirs(save_dir, exist_ok=True)

#The copernicus Global 30m DEM 

get_cop30_dem_for_bounds(
    bounds = bounds,
    save_path = f'{save_dir}/cop_glo30.tif',
    adjust_at_high_lat=False,
    cop30_folder_path = save_dir,
    ellipsoid_heights = False,
    download_dem_tiles = True
)

# The REMA DEM (32m)

get_rema_dem_for_bounds(
    bounds=bounds,
    save_path=f'{save_dir}/rema.tif',
    resolution=32,
    bounds_crs=4326,
    rema_folder_path='TMP'
)
```

## Developer Setup

```bash
git clone ...
conda create --file environment.yaml
pip install -e .
```

Test install

```bash
pytest
```

## Contact
...
